SIMD-0046: Optimistic cluster restart automation (#46)
solana-foundation/solana-improvement-documents: proposals/0024-repair-and-restart.md

acceptable.

We aim to automate the finding of oc slot and snapshot generation, so that
we can lower the possibility of human mistakes in the cluster restart process.

## Alternatives Considered

See [Handling Common Solana Outages](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1RkNAyz-5aKvv5FF44b8SoKifChKB705y5SdcEoqMPIc/edit#bookmark=id.jtrjbe6g4mk3) for details.

There are many proposals about automatically detecting that the cluster is
in an outage so validators should enter a recovery process automatically.

While getting human out of the loop greatly improves recovery speed,
automaticlly restarting the whole cluster still seems risky. Because if
the recovery process itself doesn't work, it might be some time before
we can get human's attention. And it doesn't solve the cases where new binary
is needed. So for now we still plan to have human in the loop.

## New Terminology

* SilentRepairMode - when validators restart in this new mode, they will
talk with each other to find the highest oc slot and repair all necessary
blocks. To improve speed and guarantee simplicity, Turbine, vote, and new
block generation are paused in this mode.

## Detailed Design

> A new command line arg --RepairAndRestart <optional_slots_to_send_on_last_voted_fork> is

Author: Actually you are right, chatted with Carl about this, he thinks we can just send an Epoch of slots, because currently the cluster is handling EpochSlots fine. I think it's probably enough to send 12 hours of slots by default, because normally you would have decided to restart within 12 hours during an outage. So right now I set it to 12 hours by default.

added. When the cluster is in need of a restart, we assume at least 80% will
restart with this arg. Any validators restarted with this arg does not participate
in the normal Turbine protocol, update its vote, or generate new blocks until all
of the following steps are complted.

### Gossip last vote before the restart and ancestors on that fork

> Send Gossip message LastVotedForkSlots to everyone, it contains the last voted slot on

Author: Yes, I believe we need to put these in the Slashing rules in the future, added to the doc.

its tower and the ancestor slots on the last voted fork and is sent in a bitmap like
the EpicSlots data structure. The number of ancestor slots sent is determined by
<optional_slots_to_send_on_last_voted_fork>, by default this number is 2000.

### Aggregate, repair, and replay the slots in LastVotedForkSlots
Aggregate the slots in received LastVotedForkSlots messages, whenever some slot has
more than 47% stake and it's missing locally, start the repair process for this slot.
47% is chosen because we don't want to miss any optimistically confirmed slot, those
slots have at least 67% votes, and we assume that there can be 20% validators not
participating in restarts, so we need to repair all slots with at least
67% - 20% = 47% votes.

### Gossip current heaviest fork
After receiving LastVotedForkSlots from 80% of the validators and reparing all slots
with more than 47% votes, count the heaviest fork and Gossip Heaviest(X, Hash(X)) out,
where X is the tip of the heaviest fork.

### Generate local snapshot on the heaviest slot

> Generate a local snapshot on the heaviest slot.

Author: This is done because in case people can't agree on the restart slots, people on the correct heaviest slot can restart in the old way faster using the local snapshot. People n the wrong heaviest slot can potentially download the snapshot from others.

> Generate a local snapshot on the heaviest slot.

Reviewer: hmm, we can only generate snapshots of a root currently

> Generate a local snapshot on the heaviest slot.

Author: Why is that? Is this something that can be changed?

> Generate a local snapshot on the heaviest slot.

Reviewer: > Why is that? 

Limitation of the current snapshot format

> Is this something that can be changed?

Yep, it's just software. Currently a snapshot contains a single bank and is all that's populated into `BankForks` at startup, so it's effectively considered a "root" - in that that bank will never be rolled back at runtime.

Supporting multiple banks in a snapshot certainly is desirable longer term, but would be a significant detour if support for such is deemed to be mandatory to implement this proposal

arguments.

The current process involves a lot of human intervention, if people make a
mistake in deciding the highest optimistically confirmed slot, it could mean
rollback of user transactions after those transactions have been confirmed,
which is not acceptable.

We aim to automate the finding of highest optimistically confirmed slot and
block data distribution, so that we can lower the possibility of human mistakes
in the cluster restart process.

## Alternatives Considered

See [Handling Common Solana Outages]
(https://docs.google.com/document/d/1RkNAyz-5aKvv5FF44b8SoKifChKB705y5SdcEoqMPIc)
for details.

There are many proposals about automatically detecting that the cluster is
in an outage so validators should enter a recovery process automatically.

While getting human out of the loop greatly improves recovery speed,
automaticlly restarting the whole cluster still seems risky. Because if
the recovery process itself doesn't work, it might be some time before
we can get human's attention. And it doesn't solve the cases where new binary
is needed. So for now we still plan to have human in the loop.

## New Terminology

> * SilentRepairMode - when validators restart in this new mode, they will
> talk with each other to find the highest optimistically confirmed slot and
> repair all necessary blocks. To improve speed and guarantee simplicity,
> Turbine, vote, and new block generation are paused in this mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* SilentRepairMode - when validators are started in this new mode, they will
gossip with each other to identity the highest optimistically confirmed slot and
repair all its ancestor blocks. To improve speed and guarantee simplicity,
Turbine, voting, and new block generation are paused in this mode.
```

I don't love the name "SilentRepairMode" yet, but I think we can refine that bit a little later

Author: How about "RepairBeforeRestartMode"?

Reviewer: I'm not sure we even need to name it tbh. For example the current `solana-validator --wait-for-supermajority` argument expects a `SLOT`. In the eventual Labs implementation of this SIMD, if a `SLOT` is not provided then we could enter this automated mode of identifying and repairing to the highest oc slot.

## Detailed Design

The new protocol tries to make all 80% restarting validators get the same
data blocks and the same set of last votes among them, then they can probably
make the same decision and then proceed.

The steps roughly look like this:

1. Everyone freezes, no new blocks, no new votes, and no Turbine

2. Make all blocks which can potentially have been optimistically confirmed
before the freeze propagate to everyone

3. Make restart participants' last votes before the freeze propagate to
everyone

4. Now see if enough people can optimistically agree on one block (same slot
and hash) to restart from

4.1 If yes, proceed and restart

4.2 If no, freeze and print out what you think is wrong, wait for human

> A new command line arg --RepairAndRestart <optional_slots_to_send> is added.

Reviewer: I'm still hoping we can avoid this `optional_slots_to_send` argument. What if we always sent N hours (where N is in the single digits) of slots before the highest root the validator has observed, plus all slots above its root.

Author: It's fine to remove it, just here for safety. We can set the default to 9 hours, which should be enough time?

Reviewer: Assuming the `LastVotedForkSlots` value is fixed size, we could just full it with all recent slots the validator has voted on. That'd include some amount of slots over its highest root, and then however many slots below that root that can fit  rather than prescribing an exact time bound (but yeah 9-12 hours will be more than enough based on all past outages and restarts). 

But so if the validator has voted on too many slots over the highest root such that the data size of `LastVotedForkSlots` would be exceeded, that validator can't participate in this style of automated restart.  If too many validators are in this condition then the operators need to fall back to the current method of identifying the restart slot via social consensus.

Author: Sounds good, I put this in the next section.

When the cluster is in need of a restart, we assume at least 80% will restart
with this arg. Any validators restarted with this arg does not participate in
the normal Turbine protocol, update its vote, or generate new blocks until all
of the following steps are completed.

### Gossip last vote before the restart and ancestors on that fork

Send Gossip message LastVotedForkSlots to everyone, it contains the last voted
slot on its tower and the ancestor slots on the last voted fork and is sent in
a bitmap like the EpicSlots data structure. The number of ancestor slots sent
is determined by <optional_slots_to_send_on_last_voted_fork>. By default this
number is 108000, because that's 400ms * 10800 = 12 hours, we assume most
restart decisions to be made in half a day. You can increase this number if you
restart after the outage lasted more than 12 hours.

> ### Aggregate, repair, and replay the slots in LastVotedForkSlots

Reviewer: Eventually we'll want to describe the layout of the new `LastVotedForkSlots` and `Heaviest` gossip data values in this doc. Until they are fully formed it would be useful to have a placeholder at least

Author: Added.

could make the wrong votes.

2.2 Otherwise stop traversing the tree and use last picked block.

After deciding heaviest block, Gossip
Heaviest(X, Hash(X), received_heaviest_stake) out, where X is the latest picked
block. We also send out stake of received Heaviest messages so that we can proceed
to next step when enough validators are ready.

### Proceed to restart if everything looks okay, halt otherwise

If things go well, all 80% of the validators should find the same heaviest
fork. But we are only sending slots instead of bank hashes in
LastVotedForkSlots, so it's possible that a duplicate block can make the
cluster unable to reach consensus. If at least 2/3 of the people agree on one
slot, they should proceed to restart from this slot. Otherwise validators
should halt and send alerts for human attention.

Also, there might be 5% of the validators not sending Heaviest, so we only
require that 75% of the people received 75% of the Heaviest messages and they
all agree on one block and hash.

So after a validator sees that 75% of the validators received 75% of the votes,
wait for 10 more minutes so that the message it sent out have propagated, then

> restart from the Heaviest slot everyone agreed on.

Reviewer: From our last call I was thinking once each validator has figured out the heaviest fork and repaired up to the highest oc slot, the validator would:
1. Issue a "hard fork" at the highest oc slot, which also changes the gossip shred version
2. Execute the existing "--wait-for-supermajority" logic (ie, purge all slots above the highest oc slot, wait for 80%)

Author: Changed. I think we probably. should wait for 75% here because we assume 5% could be non-conforming.

---
simd: '0024'
title: Repair and start in a cluster restart
authors:
  - Wen Xu (Solana Labs)
category: Standard
type: Core
status: Draft
created: 2023-04-07
feature: (fill in with feature tracking issues once accepted)
---

## Summary

Improve the current [cluster restart](https://docs.solana.com/running-validator/restart-cluster)

> procedure such that validators can automatically figure out confirmed slots

Reviewer: ```suggestion
procedure such that validators can automatically figure out the highest optimistically confirmed slot
```

Reviewer: I think this is accurate right? 

For now, I think we've whittled this SIMD down to the programatic determination of the  highest optimistically confirmed slot, after which essentially the existing restart mechanism is used: ie, shred-version changes, hard fork at that oc slot, all pre-restart blocks above the oc slot are flushed. Am I on the same page still?

Author: Yes, it should be highest oc slot, thanks for pointing that out.

of a restart, we assume at least 80% will restart with this arg. Any validators
restarted with this arg does not participate in the normal Turbine protocol,
update its vote, or generate new blocks until all of the following steps are
completed.

### Gossip last vote before the restart and ancestors on that fork

Send direct message LastVotedForkSlots to everyone, it contains the last voted
slot on its tower and the ancestor slots on the last voted fork and is sent in
a compressed bitmap like the EpicSlots data structure. The number of ancestor
slots sent is hard coded at 81000, because that's 400ms * 8100 = 9 hours, we
assume most restart decisions to be made in 9 hours. If a validator restarts
after 9 hours past the outage, it cannot join the restart this way. If enough
validators failed to restart within 9 hours, then use the old restart method.

The fields of LastVotedForkSlots are:

- `last_voted_slot`: the slot last voted, this also serves as last_slot for the
bit vector.
- `last_voted_hash`: the bank hash of the slot last voted slot.
- `slots`: compressed bit vector representing the slots on the last voted fork,

> last slot is always last_voted_slot, first slot is last_voted_slot-8100.

Reviewer 2: ```
last_voted_slot-8100
```
do we actually preserve the parent chain that far back?
where does this parent-chain come from?

Also what happens if a node does not have the parent-chain for that many slots?

Reviewer 2: also why do we need slots in addition to the hash?
isn't parent-chain already included in the hash?

Author: This is the same as how EpochSlots is coded, a slot number and a bit vector, so
slot 12345
bit vector 1 0 0 1
says slot 12345, 12348
Just EpochSlots specifies the first slot, we specify the last slot.

Reviewer 3: > do we actually preserve the parent chain that far back?

Chiming in for what we keep around in the blockstore:
- The retention policy by default is 200_000_000 data shreds
- The minimum allowed retention policy is 50_000_000 data shreds

With the current load of about 1_000 data shreds per slot, the default is ~200_000 slots and minimum is ~50_000 slots.

### Aggregate, repair, and replay the slots in LastVotedForkSlots

Aggregate the slots in received LastVotedForkSlots messages, whenever some slot
has enough stake to be optimistically confirmed and it's missing locally, start
the repair process for this slot.

We calculate "enough" stake as follows. When there are 80% validators joining
the restart, assuming 5% restarted validators can make mistakes in voting, any

> block with more than 67% - 5% - (100-80)% = 42% could potentially be

Reviewer 2: I don't understand this calculation.
What if the other `100% - 42% = 58%` pick some other block?
Why should the minority `42%` block be optimistically confirmed?

Why should ever a block with less than `67%` vote be optimistically confirmed?

Author: The goal here is to prevent false negative (if a slot was oc'ed before the restart, you must pick it here), not to prevent false positive (it's okay if we pick a slot here which isn't oc'ed). Because when we select Heaviest later we should see the competing fork and count the votes accordingly.

optimistically confirmed before the restart. If there are 85% validators in the
restart, then any block with more than 67% - 5% - (100-85)% = 47% could be
optimistically confirmed before the restart.

### Gossip current heaviest fork

After receiving LastVotedForkSlots from 80% of the validators and reparing
slots with "enough" stake, replay all blocks and pick the heaviest fork as
follows:

1. Pick block and update root for all blocks with more than 67% votes

2. If a picked block has more than one children, check if the votes on the
heaviest child is over threshold:

2.1 If vote_on_child + stake_on_validators_not_in_restart >= 62%, pick child.
For example, if 80% validators are in restart, child has 42% votes, then
42 + (100-80) = 62%, pick child. 62% is chosen instead of 67% because 5%

> could make the wrong votes.

Reviewer 2: similarly here, I am not sure why it is safe to go below 67%?!

proceed to next step when enough validators are ready.

The fields of the Heaviest message is:

- `slot`: slot of the picked block.
- `hash`: bank hash of the picked block.
- `received`: total of stakes of the validators it received Heaviest messages
from.

### Proceed to restart if everything looks okay, halt otherwise

If things go well, all 80% of the validators should find the same heaviest
fork. But we are only sending slots instead of bank hashes in
LastVotedForkSlots, so it's possible that a duplicate block can make the
cluster unable to reach consensus. If at least 2/3 of the people agree on one
slot, they should proceed to restart from this slot. Otherwise validators
should halt and send alerts for human attention.

Also, there might be 5% of the validators not sending Heaviest, so we only
require that 75% of the people received 75% of the Heaviest messages and they
all agree on one block and hash.

So after a validator sees that 75% of the validators received 75% of the votes,
wait for 10 more minutes so that the message it sent out have propagated, then
do the following:

- Issue a hard fork at the highest oc slot and change shred version in Gossip.

> - Execute the current --wait-for-supermajority logic and wait for 75%.

Reviewer: For this incremental step it seems best to retain same 80% that the current `--wait-for-supermajority` logic uses. If this seems reasonable then maybe this requires tweaking other numbers then?

Author: The main reason is that we assumed there could be 5% non-conforming validators, if we assume 80% here then any validator goes berserk and the restart is borked. Is that a concern?

Reviewer: Considering if we can reduce the 80% of stake we currently require on a restart just feels like best kept as a separate effort (and yes, might not be a bad idea at all to try 75% or less .. perhaps via some empirical testing on testnet to start with).

Author: Ok, I updated all numbers here to be 80% for now. I guess if we really have 5% offline we can wait for another 5% to join the restart.

> - Execute the current --wait-for-supermajority logic and wait for 75%.

Reviewer: While executing the current --wait-for-supermajority logic, the validator will still need to be transmitting `LastVotedForkSlots` and `Heaviest` periodically over gossip right? 80% of the network won't reach the `current --wait-for-supermajority logic` at the same time

Author: That's a good point, yes all messages need to be periodically sent until the restart mode ends, I'll update the doc.

> - Execute the current --wait-for-supermajority logic and wait for 75%.

Reviewer: Also wondering if we should create a new snapshot after the hard fork. If the validator is restarted for some reason in the the current --wait-for-supermajority logic, it'd be nice for it to resume from the new snapshot instead of needing to restart from 0

Author: The original proposal is to generate a snapshot, but there were concerns that we need to change logic which says we only generate snapshot at the root. I personally feel generating snapshot is a safer choice.

Reviewer: Ya in general for sure. This is the specific restart case though where we also deliberately hard fork at the highest oc slot and by doing so it effectively becomes a root as it'll never be rolled back

Author: Okay, I'll add that back. What is the reason we only generate snapshot at the root? Is it because other slots might be rolled back so there is no point generating at non-roots?

Reviewer: Yeah exactly. A snapshot currently holds but a single `Bank` (one day I'd love to see that changed to hold a full `BankForks`), so when a node starts from a snapshot there's literally no ancestor banks loaded

and hash) to restart from

4.1 If yes, proceed and restart

4.2 If no, freeze and print out what you think is wrong, wait for human

A new command line arg --RepairAndRestart is added. When the cluster is in need
of a restart, we assume at least 80% will restart with this arg. Any validators
restarted with this arg does not participate in the normal Turbine protocol,
update its vote, or generate new blocks until all of the following steps are
completed.

### Gossip last vote before the restart and ancestors on that fork

Send Gossip message LastVotedForkSlots to everyone in restart, it contains the
last voted slot on its tower and the ancestor slots on the last voted fork and
is sent in a compressed bitmap like the EpicSlots data structure. The number of
ancestor slots sent is hard coded at 81000, because that's 400ms * 81000 = 9
hours, we assume most restart decisions to be made in 9 hours. If a validator
restarts after 9 hours past the outage, it cannot join the restart this way. If
enough validators failed to restart within 9 hours, then use the old restart
method.

The fields of LastVotedForkSlots are:

> - `last_voted_slot`: the slot last voted, this also serves as last_slot for the

Reviewer: WDYT about starting at the `highest_oc_slot` instead of `last_voted_slot`? Now that we're back to pruning off everything above the highest oc slot anyway, it seems unnecessary to share votes beyond the oc slot and should simplify the `Heaviest`-collection logic since only the reported oc slots need to be considered

Author: Because locally you don't know what highest_oc_slot until you hear back from 80% of the peers what they voted?

The only thing you can make sure locally upon restart is what you personally voted last time.

Reviewer: Each validator already records their local highest oc slot, so they can easily just regurgitate that during the restart though. If a global higher oc slot is then observed, that validator knows it needs to repair, and of course the higher global oc slot should be a sibling of its local highest oc slot else panic

Author: The global highest oc slot might not be anyone's local highest oc slot. I think we need to be careful here, since the definition of highest oc slot is that >2/3 voted for it, sending last vote is really the best bet. Since here every slot is only one bit, we don't have to be too optimal here, it's okay to send more slots.

Reviewer: > The global highest oc slot might not be anyone's local highest oc slot.

 If it's not anyone's local highest oc slot then it was never observed, so does it really exist? This seems like an extreme edge case that's barely worth considering.

Reviewer: For example if the restart protocol ever produced a global highest oc slot that nobody locally could produce with `solana-ledger-tool -l ledger latest-optimistic-slots`, I'd say that's most likely a bug or attack.

Author: Let me rephrase it, it could be whoever observed the highest oc slot is not in the restart, then users could see that their block got enough votes but somehow was rolled back.
I think it's important to guarantee to users that optimistically confirmed block will never be rolled back in all cases using some kind of proof in the algorithm.
And by guaranteeing the rigorous proof we are not losing much, it's just sending a few more slots in this message.

Reviewer: > it could be whoever observed the highest oc slot is not in the restart,

hmm, but if 66%+ voted on that slot then is that really possible if we require 80% of the stake for a restart?

`LastVotedForkSlots` doesn't seem like a rigorous proof. Validators can lie about it with no consequence, specifically by claiming `last_voted_slot` is lower than what it truly was. Later there may be slashing, somehow, but that's not the case today or really dealt with in this SIMD.

Author: It's possible that 66% voted for it, but only 20% observed all the votes, the rest only observed part of the votes.

Okay, I don't have rigorous proof, but I do have something close to a proof, I can work on a formal proof if you really want that. You are right that validators can always lie in LastVotedForkSlots, but we do have assumptions that only 5% are non-conforming and they lie. And, if validators can lie about Last voted slot, they can also lie about local oc slot, I don't see a big difference here.

https://docs.google.com/document/d/1RkNAyz-5aKvv5FF44b8SoKifChKB705y5SdcEoqMPIc/edit#heading=h.ooavt3aiyxck

Note that: all the 47% etc numbers are calculated assuming we send last vote here, if we definitely need to replace last vote with locally oc slot, then all of these numbers stand on sand and we have to redesign the protocol.

I really think sending last vote is a relatively cheap price we pay for giving our users some assurance that optimistically confirmed slot is never rolled back. We could tell them local oc slot mostly works, but we couldn't really easily say under what percentage of cases this would work, and to an end-user that sounds a bit unassuring.

Reviewer: Ok fair enough. Mostly just exploring the problem a little. 

How about something about how the validator should respond if the restart process derives a highest oc slot that's not equal to or a child of validator's local oc slot seems useful: probably panic and request a human

Author: Sure, we can send a panic if a validator finds out highest oc slot is not a child of local oc slot. Added to the last step.

bit vector.
- `last_voted_hash`: the bank hash of the slot last voted slot.
- `slots`: compressed bit vector representing the slots on the last voted fork,
last slot is always last_voted_slot, first slot is last_voted_slot-81000.

> When a validator enters restart, it increments its current shred_version, so

Reviewer: > it increments its current shred_version

There is a slight chance that `current_shred_version + 1 % 0xffff` (shred version is just a `u16`) will equal the new shred_version after the restart. I think this is probably ok as normal gossip shouldn't want to pull/push the restart crds values. Might be worth a mention though

Author: The current proposal is just do a CRDS flush upon restart, to avoid sending any trash into the future, so I think we are fine. Mentioned that here.

---
simd: '0024'
title: Repair and start in a cluster restart
authors:
  - Wen Xu (Solana Labs)
category: Standard
type: Core
status: Draft
created: 2023-04-07
feature: (fill in with feature tracking issues once accepted)
---

## Summary

Improve the current [cluster restart](https://docs.solana.com/running-validator/restart-cluster)
procedure such that validators can automatically figure out the highest
optimistically confirmed slot and then proceed to restart if everything looks
fine.

## New Terminology

None

## Motivation

Currently during a cluster restart, validator operators need to decide latest
optimistically confirmed slot, then restart the validators with new commandline
arguments.

The current process involves a lot of human intervention, if people make a
mistake in deciding the highest optimistically confirmed slot, it could mean
rollback of user transactions after those transactions have been confirmed,
which is not acceptable.

> We aim to automate the finding of highest optimistically confirmed slot and

Reviewer 4: oh i guess these _were_ being submitted while github was having issues this morning. i'll delete the others :sweat_smile:

block data distribution, so that we can lower the possibility of human mistakes
in the cluster restart process.

## Alternatives Considered

See [Handling Common Solana Outages](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1RkNAyz-5aKvv5FF44b8SoKifChKB705y5SdcEoqMPIc)
for details.

There are many proposals about automatically detecting that the cluster is
in an outage so validators should enter a recovery process automatically.

While getting human out of the loop greatly improves recovery speed,
automaticlly restarting the whole cluster still seems risky. Because if
the recovery process itself doesn't work, it might be some time before
we can get human's attention. And it doesn't solve the cases where new binary
is needed. So for now we still plan to have human in the loop.

## Detailed Design

The new protocol tries to make all 80% restarting validators get the same
data blocks and the same set of last votes among them, then they can probably

> make the same decision and then proceed.

Reviewer 5: what is the "decision"?  Maybe "decision on the canonical fork"

The steps roughly look like this:

> 1. Everyone freezes, no new blocks, no new votes, and no Turbine

Reviewer 5: "no turbine" seems oddly specific because it's just one protocol of many that run in the validator. 

Also this new recovery would be running completely separate of the validator, so turbine would be off by assumption.

Would be good to specify this is a protocol entirely separate from normal validator operation, i.e. step 1 is validator boots into a separate recovery mode.

> 1. Everyone freezes, no new blocks, no new votes, and no Turbine

Reviewer 5: Instead of saying "Everyone", I think we should outline the protocol from an individual validators' perspective, i.e. "Each validator `V` does ..."

2. Make all blocks which can potentially have been optimistically confirmed
before the freeze propagate to everyone

3. Make restart participants' last votes before the freeze propagate to
everyone

4. Now see if enough people can optimistically agree on one block (same slot
and hash) to restart from

4.1 If yes, proceed and restart

> 4.2 If no, freeze and print out what you think is wrong, wait for human

Reviewer 5: It might be good to explain how this list maps to the later sections of the design document. 

Right now this is messy because you say the steps are "roughly" described in this summary list. This is fine as a initial briefing for the reader, but should be followed by a series of sections that rigorously outline each item in the list.

For instance, "Everyone freezes, no new blocks, no new votes, and no Turbine" should be described in much more detail in a separate section

Reviewer: @wen-coding - I started doing this instinctively but I'll stop now..feel free to proactively resolve conversations where you've made what you believe to be the requested changes. This helps keep the review tidy and more approachable. If the counterparty disagrees, they can simply reopen the conversation with a nasty comment :)

A new command line arg --RepairAndRestart is added. When the cluster is in need
of a restart, we assume at least 80% will restart with this arg. Any validators
restarted with this arg does not participate in the normal Turbine protocol,
update its vote, or generate new blocks until all of the following steps are
completed.

### Gossip last vote before the restart and ancestors on that fork

> Send Gossip message LastVotedForkSlots to everyone in restart, it contains the

Reviewer 5: Also would be good to code quote all references to code structures like `LastVotedForkSlots`

> Send Gossip message LastVotedForkSlots to everyone in restart, it contains the

Reviewer 5: I think we should first define what gossip  network we are referring to in this context before we even enter this section. Maybe a first section describing the necessary components in this proposal, i.e.

1. A separate recovery protocol
2. A separate gossip network called `recovery_gossip`, and describe when people enter/leave this layer as they enter the recovery protocol from 1.

Then we can reference the gossip network in these following sections by saying, push to the `recovery_gossip` layer.

last voted slot on its tower and the ancestor slots on the last voted fork and

> is sent in a compressed bitmap like the EpicSlots data structure. The number of

Reviewer 5: finally had to pop the balloon 🎈

When a validator enters restart, it increments its current shred_version, so
the Gossip messages used in restart will not interfere with those outside the
restart. There is slight chance that (current_shred_version+1) % 0xffff would
collide with the new shred_version calculated after the restart, but even if
this rare case occured, we plan to flush the CRDS table on successful restart,
so Gossip messages used in restart will be removed.

### Aggregate, repair, and replay the slots in LastVotedForkSlots

Aggregate the slots in received LastVotedForkSlots messages, whenever some slot
has enough stake to be optimistically confirmed and it's missing locally, start
the repair process for this slot.

We calculate "enough" stake as follows. When there are 80% validators joining
the restart, assuming 5% restarted validators can make mistakes in voting, any
block with more than 67% - 5% - (100-80)% = 42% could potentially be
optimistically confirmed before the restart. If there are 85% validators in the
restart, then any block with more than 67% - 5% - (100-85)% = 47% could be
optimistically confirmed before the restart.

### Gossip current heaviest fork

> After receiving LastVotedForkSlots from 80% of the validators and reparing

Reviewer 5: `reparing` -> `repairing`

slots with "enough" stake, replay all blocks and pick the heaviest fork as
follows:

1. Pick block and update root for all blocks with more than 67% votes

2. If a picked block has more than one children, check if the votes on the
heaviest child is over threshold:

2.1 If vote_on_child + stake_on_validators_not_in_restart >= 62%, pick child.
For example, if 80% validators are in restart, child has 42% votes, then
42 + (100-80) = 62%, pick child. 62% is chosen instead of 67% because 5%
could make the wrong votes.

2.2 Otherwise stop traversing the tree and use last picked block.

> After deciding heaviest block, Gossip

Reviewer 5: `gossip` lowercase

The fields of the Heaviest message is:

- `slot`: slot of the picked block.
- `hash`: bank hash of the picked block.
- `received`: total of stakes of the validators it received Heaviest messages
from.

### Proceed to restart if everything looks okay, halt otherwise

If things go well, all 80% of the validators should find the same heaviest
fork. But we are only sending slots instead of bank hashes in
LastVotedForkSlots, so it's possible that a duplicate block can make the
cluster unable to reach consensus. If at least 2/3 of the people agree on one
slot, they should proceed to restart from this slot. Otherwise validators
should halt and send alerts for human attention.

We will also perform some safety checks, if the voted slot does not satisfy
safety checks, then the validators will panic and halt:

- The voted slot is equal or a child of local optimistically confirmed slot.

We require that at least 80% of the people received the Heaviest messages from
validators with at least 80% stake, and that the Heaviest messages all agree on
one block and hash.

So after a validator sees that 80% of the validators received 80% of the votes,

> wait for 10 more minutes so that the message it sent out have propagated, then

Reviewer 4: my point was that using a static delay doesn't do anything to improve synchronization because the nodes will all start and end that sleep out of sync by the gossip network delay. the suggestion to delay until fixed wall clock intervals instead of a static delay will improve the situation so long as wall clock skew across the cluster is tighter than the gossip network delay.

feature: (fill in with feature tracking issues once accepted)
---

## Summary

During a cluster restart following an outage, use gossip to exchange local
status and automatically reach consensus on the block to restart from. Proceed
to restart if validators in the restart can reach agreement, or print debug
information and halt otherwise.

## New Terminology

* "cluster restart": When there is an outage such that the whole cluster
stalls, human may need to restart most of the validators with a sane state so
that the cluster can continue to function. This is different from sporadic
single validator restart which does not impact the cluster. See
[cluster restart](https://docs.solana.com/running-validator/restart-cluster)
for details.

* "optimistically confirmed block": a block which gets the votes from the
majority of the validators in a cluster (> 2/3 stake). Our algorithm tries to
guarantee that an optimistically confirmed will never be rolled back. When we 
are performing cluster restart, we normally start from the highest 
optimistically confirmed block, but it's also okay to start from a child of the 
highest optimistically confirmed block as long as consensus can be reached.

> 

Reviewer: 😩 how are these not in https://docs.solana.com/terminology yet! Would you mind sending a PR into the monorepo to add these terms, they really aren't new for this SIMD!

Author: Sure, but can I keep these here so the document is self-contained?

Reviewer: We can get those terms on docs.solana.com pretty quickly too, but meanwhile sure makes sense!

> * "silent repair phase": In the new repair and restart plan, the validators in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* "silent repair phase": During the proposed optimistic cluster restart automation process, the validators in
```

restart will first spend some time to exchange information, repair missing
blocks, and finally reach consensus. The validators only continue normal block
production and voting after consensus is reached. We call this preparation
phase where block production and voting are paused the silent repair phase.

> * "ephemeral shred version": right now we update `shred_version` during a

Reviewer: "silent repair shred version"?

Author: Changed

cluster restart, it is used to verify received shreds and filter Gossip peers. 

> In the new repair and restart plan, we introduce a new temporary shred version 

Reviewer: Another "new repair and restart plan" ref that probably should be renamed :)

Author: Fixed, I believe this is the last one.

`(current_shred_version + 1) % 0xffff`.

* `RESTART_STAKE_THRESHOLD`: We need enough validators to participate in a
restart so they can make decision for the whole cluster. If everything works
perfect, we only need 2/3 of the total stake. However, validators could die
or perform abnormally, so we currently set the `RESTART_STAKE_THRESHOLD` at
80%, which is the same as now.

## Motivation

Currently during a cluster restart, validator operators need to decide the
highest optimistically confirmed slot, then restart the validators with new
command-line arguments.

The current process involves a lot of human intervention, if people make a
mistake in deciding the highest optimistically confirmed slot, it is
detrimental to the viability of the ecosystem.

We aim to automate the negotiation of highest optimistically confirmed slot and
the distribution of all blocks on that fork, so that we can lower the 
possibility of human mistakes in the cluster restart process. This also reduces 
the burden on validator operators, because they don't have to stay around while 
the validators automatically try to reach consensus, they will be paged if 

> things go wrong.

Reviewer: "they will be paged if things go wrong." -- this feels slightly like editorializing as we don't actually add a paging facility on this proposal, although we may want to suggest under what condition a paging solution could be triggered (unexpected validator exit?)

Author: Changed, does this look better?

## Alternatives Considered

### Automatically detect outage and perform cluster restart
The reaction time of a human in case of emergency is measured in minutes,
while a cluster restart where human initiate validator restarts takes hours.
We considered various approaches to automatically detect outage and perform
cluster restart, which can reduce recovery speed to minutes or even seconds.

However, automatically restarting the whole cluster seems risky. Because
if the recovery process itself doesn't work, it might be some time before
we can get human's attention. And it doesn't solve the cases where new binary
is needed. So for now we still plan to have human in the loop.

After we gain more experience with the restart approach in this proposal, we
may slowly try to automate more parts to improve cluster reliability.

### Use gossip and consensus to figure out restart slot before the restart
The main difference between current proposal and this proposal is that this
proposal will automatically enter restart preparation phase without human 

> intervention.

Reviewer: "without human intervention." - not really true right? the validator client still needs to be manually restarted by the operator to enter silent repair mode

Author: This alternative is trying to figure out the restart slot before restart, while our current proposal needs human intervention, changed, does this look better?

automatically start a new message in gossip seems risky.

### Automatically reduce block production in an outage
Right now we have vote-only mode, a validator will only pack vote transactions
into new blocks if the tower distance (last_vote - local_root) is greater than
400 slots.

Unfortunately in the previous outages vote-only mode isn't enough to save the
cluster. There are proposals of more aggressive block production reduction to
save the cluster. For example, a leader could produce only one block in four
consecutive slots allocated to it.

However, this only solves the problem in specific type of outage, and it seems
risky to aggressively reduce block production, so we are not proceeding with
this proposal for now.

## Detailed Design

The new protocol tries to make all restarting validators get the same data
blocks and the same set of last votes, then they will almost certainly make the 
same decision on the canonical fork and proceed.

A new command line arg will be added. When the cluster is in need
of a restart, we assume validators holding at least `RESTART_STAKE_THRESHOLD`
percentage of stakes will restart with this arg. Then the following steps
will happen:

> 1. The validator boots into the silent repair phase, it will not make new 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. The operator restarts the validator with a new command-line argument to cause it to enter the silent repair phase at boot, where it will not make new 
```

> blocks or change its votes. The validator propagates its local voted fork

Reviewer: ```suggestion
blocks or vote. The validator propagates its local voted fork
```
(we **never** change votes, only vote on higher blocks!)

others in restart.

We use a new Gossip message `LastVotedForkSlots`, its fields are:

- `last_voted_slot`: `u64` the slot last voted, this also serves as last_slot
for the bit vector.
- `last_voted_hash`: `Hash` the bank hash of the slot last voted slot.
- `ancestors`: `BitVec<u8>` compressed bit vector representing the slots on
sender's last voted fork. the most significant bit is always
`last_voted_slot`, least significant bit is `last_voted_slot-81000`.

The number of ancestor slots sent is hard coded at 81000, because that's
400ms * 81000 = 9 hours, we assume most restart decisions to be made in 9 
hours. If a validator restarts after 9 hours past the outage, it cannot join 
the restart this way. If enough validators failed to restart within 9 hours, 
then fallback to the manual, interactive cluster restart method.

When a validator enters restart, it uses ephemeral shred version to avoid
interfering with those outside the restart. There is slight chance that 
the ephemeral shred version would collide with the shred version after the
silent repair phase, but even if this rare case occurred, we plan to flush the 

> CRDS table on successful restart, so gossip messages used in restart will be 

Reviewer: When in normal gossip mode, I feel like we also shouldn't pull the `LastVotedForkSlots` and `Heaviest` messages and filter them out from a push. Otherwise these messages could end up floating around in gossip anyway

Author: Sure we can do that, added.

Author: First of all I feel we should select repair peers only from validators in restart, because at this point you don't know what the status of non-restarted validators are, they could be buried in Turbine/Gossip/random traffic so they can't effectively answer your repair requests.

Chatted a bit with Ashwin, I feel like to not pollute normal Gossip, there are two options:
1. Use "silent restart shred version", but this means you have to add in a hack where during repairs you accept shreds in original shred version.
2. Make validators in restart drop normal Gossip messages, and make validators not in restart drop restart Gossip messages (keep the ClusterInfo messages, of course), then we don't need the "silent restart shred version".

Reviewer: 2 seems nice if it'll work. Gossip has proven itself to be incredibly resilient so I think it likely will

Author: @behzadnouri Do you think option 2 would work?

Author: Hmm, option 2 might not work too well when the number of restarted validators is small. Because when a restarted validator try to push LastVotedForkSlots to others, the peers it selected might all be non-restarted validators which drop this message. Of course, a newly restarted validator can pull the messages, but it needs to know which restarted peer to pull from.
Basically with option 2 we still need to know who's restarted when pushing and pulling to make gossip efficient. But this involves more hacks in gossip code.

Author: Thought about this more, since this is outage handling, I'd prefer the solution to be less intrusive so it doesn't interfere with normal logic.
Read the code a bit more, I think manipulating shred_version is still the less intrusive option. We can use only the silent_repair_shred_version on Gossip and uses the original shred_version elsewhere so that repair would just work.
This would mean validators not in restart are able to send over shreds, it may consume more memory but I think it's not worth putting in additional hack to block, because if any validator is malicious then it's easy to send shreds belonging to any shred_version.
So I'd still stick with option 1. We can maybe filter out the restart Gossip messages on validators not in restart if we want, even if we don't, it's just doubling the resource needed for EpochSlots, so it should be fine as well.

Reviewer: sg, I'm on board with that approach. I agree it should be much less intrusive to the existing Labs validator code base

removed.

### 2. Repair ledgers up to the restart slot

The main goal of this step is to repair all blocks which could potentially be
optimistically confirmed.

We need to prevent false negative at all costs, because we can't rollback an 
optimistically confirmed block. However, false positive is okay. Because when 
we select the heaviest fork in the next step, we should see all the potential 
candidates for optimistically confirmed slots, there we can count the votes and
remove some false positive cases.

However, it's also overkill to repair every block presented by others. When
`LastVotedForkSlots` messages are being received and aggregated, a validator
can categorize blocks missing locally into 3 categories: ignored, must-have, 
and unsure. Depending on the stakes of validators currently in restart, some
slots with too few stake can be safely ignored, some have enough stake they
should definitely be repaired, and the rest would be undecided pending more
confirmations.

Assume `RESTART_STAKE_THRESHOLD` is 80% and that 5% restarted validators can

> make mistakes in voting.

Reviewer: "can make mistakes in voting." - being more precise about the exact voting concern here I think would be helpful for overall understanding. I think we're trying to point out the risk of validators literally changing their votes (deliberately or otherwise) in the `LastVotedForkSlots` message from what they actually voted on pre-restart

Author: Changed.
